an independent review of the United
Nations relief and works Agency for
Palestinian refugees has found that
Israel has yet to provide supporting
evidence of its accusations unwa
employees are members of Hamas and
linked to the October 7th attacks on
Israel the report by a former French
foreign minister found Staffing lists
had regularly been provided for vetting
since 2011 but Israel did not raise
concerns since that claim was made in
January many countries cut their funding
to unwa including the biggest funders
the US Germany and the EU unwa supports
5.9 million people across five
territories Gaza the occupied West Bank
Lebanon Jordan and Syria often providing
the basic necessities of life from food
to schools and even infrastructure in
refugee camps we'll bring in Gabriel
eando who's joining us now from the
United Nations Headquarters in New York
Gabriel what is the takeaway message
from this report and what more are we
learning at this
hour I think the takeaway message is
very clear that uh this report gives a
clean bill of health to unra when it
comes to the issues of neutrality in
fact they don't have any issues of
neutrality that's the major takeaway
here this report uh by Katherine Colona
and three European human rights
organizations was an independent report
it lasted nearly three months for them
to collect data they speak to over spoke
to over 200 different people in
interviews reviewed thousands of
documents and visited unra offices and
other offices in the region to reach
their conclusions I'll read a couple key
lines from here when it comes to
neutrality the report states that unra
possesses a more developed approach to
neutrality than other similar un or NGO
uh entities a more developed approach it
also said that when it comes to uh unra
staff members 32,000 of which uh work
for unra uh it said that uh unra
regularly gives entire lists of their
employees uh information to Israel and
at no time has Israel uh since 2011 ever
come back to unra to say that they had
any problem with any of the unra
employees unra has extensive vetting
processes according to this report
report and vetting processes that are
reviewed periodically including with
their Freelancers they have 5,000
employees that are not full-time staff
members and they go through the same
vetting process and the same neutrality
training that the full-time staff
members do and in conclusion as you
mentioned uh the report states that
Israel of course has identified what
they say are 12 unre employees that took
part uh in October 7th and are
affiliated with Hamas uh this report
says confirms what we've been hearing
from the secretary General's
spokesperson for many months now that
Israel has given no evidence of that to
the investigators uh during this during
the rep this report and their findings
all right thank you so much Gabriel
isand thanks for that update from the
United Nations here's a look at unas
assistance for Palestinians so the UN
agency supports nearly 6 million
Palestinian refugees right across the
Middle East it runs 706 schools and 140
Primary Health Care Facilities it also
provides food and cash assistance to
more than 1.8 million Palestinians most
of them in Gaza it employs about 13,000
staff 178 of whom have been killed in
the Israeli attack since October the 7th
more than 164 unaa facilities have been
destroyed during the war and the US is
the agency's biggest donor in 2023 it
contributed
$422 million to
unwa we can now bring in Chris gunnis
who's a former un spokesman joining us
from London as someone who knows the
agency so well Chris gunnis just give me
your sort of initial reading to the
findings of this
report well I welcome this report and I
think unra will welcome it because it
confirms that unra is an indispensable
Lifeline for the people of the Middle
East the refugees it also confirms unra
has established significant number of
mechanisms and procedures to ensure
compliance with humanitarian principles
particularly neutrality and it says anra
possesses a more robust approach
neutrality than any other un or NGO
organization this is key because right
now there's this big debate about should
other agencies take over should world
food program do the food distributions
in Northern Gaza well koder is saying
unra has better neutrality mechanisms
than all of these others and perhaps
most significant Colona is saying
clearly that though Israel has made
these public claims about a large number
of UNR employees that they are allegedly
members of terrorist organizations
Israel has yet to provide supporting
evidence of this in other words these
allegations that triggered this crisis
remain unsubstantiated it would seem
that the Israeli claims amount to the
mother of all lies based on a dodgy and
if I may just make one last point on the
curriculum which you know this is often
used as a stick to be HRA the technical
report on which the colonal report is
based says very clearly that anra has
and I quote it's responsive to criticism
of its textbooks and has initiated a
range of initiatives to ensure
neutrality of the teaching material it
finds that unas education policies
updated guidelines and manuals have
become robust and adequate for purpose
that I think is a ringing endorsement of
unra even though it comes up with some
proposals for donor relations and staff
oversight but by and large I'm delighted
with this report and I think H will
embrace it before we talk about the
proposals let me just ask you this I
mean during your time at on did you ever
witness sort of violations of the
principles of humanitarian neutrality
and how rigorous were the standards of
neutrality for
unwa well let's talk about the context
because when you're dealing with
occupation
blockade the dispossession of the
Palestinians that began in 1948 well of
course there are going to be some bad
apples and yes of course in the
situation of War there will be
neutrality problems the key test is not
the problems but how unra has responded
and anra as Colona has found has robust
Mech mechanisms in place I am lived
experience of the fact that whenever
there were credible reports of
neutrality violations HRA would would
always investigate disciplinary action
would always be taken up to an including
dismissal from the agency and guess what
we did that for years to the
satisfaction of our major donors in 2017
for example there was a major audit by
the American government audit office and
after that root and Branch audit They
carried on giving unra 350 millionar a
year and that's why I say to the UK in
particular but others they need to look
at this report and say say we are
providing you with a ladder on which to
climb down to come back it's clear that
UNR processes are robust and there is no
longer any reason to continue
withholding money from this agency which
is doing life-saving work across the
Middle East will these suggestions put
forward in the report such as uh
expanding the capacity of the internal
oversight service providing more
in-person training more support from
donor countries do you think that these
uh proposals are enough to appease those
donors that have cut funding like the UK
and the
US well the donors know full well that
in partnership with them unra has been
using these very mechanisms that Colona
is highlighting for years so yes I think
the donors know very well that unra does
have these donor relations mechanisms
these oversight mechanisms in place yes
of course more can always be done but I
think the donors know very well what is
there because unra has been working
transparently with them for decades
implementing this robust Zero Tolerance
policy so yes it's time for the donors
to come back okay Chris Gunners thank
you we thank you for joining us out of
London thank you very much we're now
joined by our diplomatic editor James
baz here in the studio James how damning
is this report for Israel well Israel
has made some very very serious
allegations ations if you make serious
allegations normally you're supposed to
come up with some evidence to prove
those allegations the UN has repeatedly
said that it has not been provided by
these with this information there's a
separate report being done by the office
of internal oversight that's another
part of the UN they haven't got the
information they want from Israel so if
Israel is not providing the evidence why
is Israel not providing the evidence and
are these completely unfounded
allegations that that is the simple
question that is begged by by by by by
the situation on the ground and when it
comes to this issue that I was just
discussing actually with Chris gunnis he
raised it that one of the allegations
that Israel uh puts forward is that unwa
schools across the region use textbooks
with anti-semitic content in them I'm
not sure if you've taken a look at the
entire report but from what you've seen
has there been any evidence of that
whatsoever and that is a repeated
allegation that's been made by Israel no
there isn't and um I I think it's worth
saying that there are many figures in
Israel who do not want anra to exist
they've long not wanted anra to exist
and one of the reasons for that I think
is because unra provides state-like
services and yes it's operated by the UN
as a UN agency but it's Palestinians
doing the work so it is a sort of part
of a de facto Palestinian State also
unra doesn't just work in East Jerusalem
Gaza and the West Bank it also works in
Syria in Lebanon in Jordan Andra is that
link between the Palestinians who are
there on Palestinian soil and the
refugees the refugees who want a right
to return who the UN when it set up um
unra was assuming were going to go back
home and that's a link that Israel
doesn't like at all because that goes
against the Israeli long-standing policy
of not returning refugees absolutely
absolutely um what about the um the
issue of when the allegations came out
back in January we saw a whole host of
countries of course cut their funding to
Ona some which restored it but we know
that the UK and the US still have not do
you think that this report is going to
make a difference this is this is where
the damage I think has already been done
because there is now a bill that's gone
through Congress saying the US is not
allowed to restore the funding to unra
until
2025 um well the US last year was $371
Million us that's a third of the funding
from unra at a time when anra are the
main body on the ground doing the work
with such a dreadful cost to to their
staff on the ground unra is needed more
than ever many would say and that that
dent of a third of the funding for the
US and that's not coming back we know
that because of uh because of
congressional legislation in the UK uh
they were waiting for this Colona report
but already in the ruling conservative
party very pro-israel MPS quite
prominent some of them are saying no no
we shouldn't give the funding um so
these allegations even though there's no
evidence to support the allegations are
still doing damage and that means damage
to those people on the ground in Gaza
those that so desperately need
humanitarian Aid a place where people
have had nearly 7even months of
bombardment and where people are dying
now of famine okay and we'll wait to see
what impact this report actually has but
for the time being James B thank you so
much make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer